.TH QDIRSTAT-CACHE-WRITER "1" "July 2017"
.SH NAME
qdirstat\-cache\-writer \- script to write QDirStat cache files from cron jobs
.SH "Usage:"
\fI\,qdirstat\-cache\-writer\/\fP [\-ldvh] <directory> [<cache\-file\-name>]
.IP
If not specified, <cache\-file\-name> defaults to ".qdirstat.cache.gz"
in <directory>.
.IP
If <cache\-file\-name> ends with ".gz", it will be compressed with gzip.
qdirstat can read gzipped and plain text cache files.
.TP
\fB\-l\fR
long format \- always add full path, even for plain files
.TP
\fB\-m\fR
scan mounted file systems (cross file system boundaries)
.TP
\fB\-v\fR
verbose
.TP
\fB\-d\fR
debug
.TP
\fB\-h\fR
help (this usage message)
.PP
QDirStat can read its information from cache files. This is a lot faster than
reading all the directories in a directory tree and obtaining detailed
information (size, type, last modification time) for each file and directory
with the opendir() / readdir() and lstat() system calls for each individual
file and directory.
.PP
QDirStat can also write those cache files ("Write Cache File..." from the
"File" menu), but the whole point of cache files is being able to do that in
the background when the user does not have to wait for it \- like in a cron
job running in the middle of the night. QDirStat itself cannot be used to do
that because it is a KDE program and thus an X program that needs access to
an X display \- which cron does not provide.
.SH "AUTHOR"
This manual page was written by Patrick Matth\[:a]i <pmatthaei@debian.org>
for qdirstat.
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU General Public License, Version 2 any
later version published by the Free Software Foundation.
