.TH "QDirStat" "1" "July 2019"
.SH NAME
QDirStat \- Qt\-based directory statistics

.SH DESCRIPTION
QDirStat is a graphical application to show where your disk space has gone and
to help you to clean it up.

.SH USAGE
.B qdirstat
[OPTION]...
[\fI<directory\-name>\fR]

.B qdirstat
\-\-cache|\-c \fI<cache\-file\-name>\fR

.B qdirstat
pkg:/\fI<pkg-spec>\fR

.B qdirstat
unpkg:/\fI<dir>\fR

.SH OPTIONS

.PP
.B \-h|\-\-help
.IP
Show a summary of command line options on stdout.
.B That information might be more up-to-date than this man page.


.PP
.B \-s|\-\-slow\-update
.IP
Slow down display updates during directory reading. This is useful when running
QDirStat over a remote X11 connection.

The exact update interval is specified in the \fBSlowUpdateMillisec\fR
parameter in the \fB[DirectoryTree]\fR section of the configuration file. The
default is 3000 milliseconds (3 seconds).


.PP
.B \-d|\-\-dont-ask
.IP
Don't prompt for a directory to read upon program start even if no directory
was specified on the command line.


.PP
.B \-c|\-\-cache \fI<cache\-file\-name>\fR
.IP
Read the content of a directory tree from a \fIcache file\fR that was generated
by QDirStat's "Write to Cache File" option or by the \fBqdirstat-cache-writer\fR
script.

A file \fB.qdirstat.cache.gz\fR in the directory that it describes is
automatically picked up and used: A cache file
/data/archive/foo/.qdirstat.cache.gz with the content of /data/archive/foo is
used automatically when found while reading a directory tree containing it.

.SH NORMAL OPERATION

.PP
You start the program without any parameters; then it will open a directory
selection box to let you choose an existing directory. Alternatively, you can
specify the path of an existing directory as a command line parameter.

The program will then start reading that directory tree, i.e. it will
recursively traverse that directory tree and read information for each
directory and its subdirectories.

The result is displayed in a tree view where you can open and close
branches. The tree view displays information such as the accumulated size of
each subtree, the number of items, the number of files, the latest modification
time ("mtime") in that subtree, and some more. You can sort the tree by each of
those columns.

You can select one or more items in the tree view to get more detailed
information or to start "cleanup actions": Move to trash, remove immediately
(caution!), create a gzipped tarball from a directory, "make clean", open a
file manager window with that directory or start a shell there - and more. Use
the context menu (right mouse button) or the "Clean Up" menu in the menu bar
(you can "tear off" that menu so it remains open).

There are three predefined column layouts L1, L2, L3 where you can switch what
columns are displayed and whether or not to display the details panel at the
right.

Right-click on a column header to show or hide individual columns or to switch
between automatic column width and a user-defined width (drag the column
divider in the header). You can rearrange the order of columns with drag and
drop (but the "Name" column will always remain fixed at the very left side).


.SH THE TREEMAP

As a secondary view, there is a "treemap" with colored rectangles
("tiles"). The area of each of those tiles corresponds to its size; the larger
a tile, the larger the item. So you can spot a large file buried deep down in
the directory hierarchy easily.

The color of each tile corresponds to its type ("MIME category"). There are a
number of predefined categories such as images (photos etc.), videos, music
etc.; they can be configured in the configuration dialog (menu "Edit" ->
"Configure QDirStat").


.SH PKG URLS / PACKAGES VIEW

.PP
Specifying a \fBpkg:/\fR URL at the command line starts the packages view that
groups files by the software package they belong to.

The package specification in the pkg:/ URL is case insensitive.

Some heuristics are used to determine what mode to use: The default is "starts
with", but if the search pattern contains typical regexp special characters, it
interprets the pattern as a regular expression.

If it detects just "*" (not ".*") or "?", it uses wildcard mode.

If the first character is "=", it uses exact matching.

.PP
\fBqdirstat pkg:/chrom\fR
.IP
This shows all packages starting with "chrom" or "Chrom" or "CHROM".

.PP
\fBqdirstat pkg:/=emacs\fR
.IP
This shows only package "emacs", not "emacs25" or any other one starting with
"emacs".

.PP
\fBqdirstat "pkg:/*gtk*"\fR
.IP
This shows all packages that have "gtk" somewhere in their name.

Notice that you have to protect the "*" wildcards from the shell by escaping
them with quotes.

.PP
\fBqdirstat "pkg:/.*qt[45].*"\fR
.IP
This shows all Qt4 or Qt5 packages.

.PP
\fBqdirstat "pkg:/(firefox|mozilla|chrome|chromium|opera)"\fR
.IP
This shows all the well-known browsers on the system. Notice that regular
expressions use a partial match, so use the "^" and "$" anchors when appropriate.


.SH UNPKG URLS / UNPACKAGED FILES VIEW

.PP
Specifying an \fBunpkg:/\fR URL at the command line starts the "unpackaged
files" view: This reads the specified directory and ignores files that are
owned by an installed software package.
.PP
Some well-known directories that are known to contain only unpackaged files are
excluded by default, and some file types are ignored by default:

.IP
.TS
tab(@);
l l .
/home@user home directories
/root@home directory of the root user
/tmp@directory for temporary files
/var@variable data for all kinds of software
/usr/lib/sysimage/rpm@RPM database
/usr/local@locally installed software

*.pyc@compiled Python files
.TE

.PP
This list can be modified when starting the unpackaged files view from the
menu. Starting the view from the command line uses the same settings that were
used last time when using the menu.

.PP
\fBqdirstat unpkg:/\fR
.IP
This shows the unpackaged files of the complete root filesystem.

.PP
\fBqdirstat unpkg:/usr/share\fR
.IP
This shows the unpackaged files of /usr/share.


.SH FILES

.TS
tab(@);
l l .
~/.config/QDirStat/QDirStat-cleanup.conf@cleanup actions configuration
~/.config/QDirStat/QDirStat-exclude.conf@exclude rules configuration
~/.config/QDirStat/QDirStat-mime.conf@MIME categories configuration
~/.config/QDirStat/QDirStat.conf@general configuration

/tmp/qdirstat-$USER/qdirstat.log@current / last log file
/tmp/qdirstat-$USER/qdirstat-*.old@previous log files

**/.qdirstat.cache.gz@auto-used cache file
.TE


It is safe to delete any or all of the configuration files; the next program
start will restore them with default settings.

The configuration files can safely be edited while QDirStat is not
running. Many parameters can be accessed via GUI, but some (the more arcane
ones) can only be changed by editing a configuration file manually.

.SH PROJECT HOME PAGE

.UR
https://github.com/shundhammer/qdirstat

.SH SEE ALSO

.UR
https://github.com/shundhammer/qdirstat/tree/master/doc

and don't forget the "Help" menu!


.SH BUGS
See the issue tracker at the project repository:

.UR
https://github.com/shundhammer/qdirstat/issues


.PP
.SH AUTHORS

QDirStat was written by Stefan Hundhammer <Stefan.Hundhammer@gmx.de> based on
the original KDE 3 KDirStat (also by Stefan Hundhammer). While a number of
people contributed small patches and fixes, the project is largely a
one-man-show.

This manual page was written by Stefan Hundhammer <Stefan.Hundhammer@gmx.de>
based on the initial one written for QDirStat by Patrick Matth\[:a]i
<pmatthaei@debian.org>.

Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU General Public License, Version 2 any
later version published by the Free Software Foundation.
